Java: Aggregation API (#2125)
capire/docs: java/working-with-cql/query-api.md

              b.get("title").startsWith("Wuth")));
```

### Aggregating { #aggregating }

#### Aggregation Functions { #aggregation-functions }

> Use [aggregation functions](/guides/databases#aggregate-functions) to calculate minimums, maximums, totals, averages, and counts of values. You can use them in *columns* of `Select` statements to include the aggregated values in the result set, or in the *where* clause to filter based on aggregated values.

Reviewer: > You can use them in *columns*

I think we should have a paragraph which describes that if you aggregate _this_ entity you can use aggregate functions in colums, typically together with `groupBy`. Or you aggregate _associated_ entities. Then you follow the "aggregation over associations" section below.

> in the *where* clause

this applies to aggregates from associated entities; if you aggregate _this_ entity you filter in having

#### Aggregating over Associations <Beta /> { #aggregating-associations }

Use the aggregation methods `min`, `max`, `sum`, and `count` to calculate minimums, maximums, totals, and counts of values of associated entities directly in your CQL queries. You can use these aggregation methods in *columns* to include the aggregated values in the result set, or in the *where* clause to filter the result set based on aggregated values.

::: tip

> Use [infix filters](/cds/cql#with-infix-filters) to aggregate only a subset of a collection.

Author: ```suggestion
Use [infix filters](/cds/cql#with-infix-filters) to aggregate only a subset of a (to-many) association.
```

:::

#### min

Find the minimum value of an element in a collection.

```java
Select.from(ORDERS).columns(
    o -> o.id(),
    o -> o.items()
       .filter(i -> i.amount().gt(0)) // optional filter
       .min(i -> i.amount()).as("minAmount")
);
```

This query selects each order’s id and the minimum item amount greater than 0 as "minAmount".

#### max

Find the maximum value of an element in a collection.

```java
Select.from(ORDERS)
    .where(o -> o.items().max(i -> i.amount()).gt(100));
```

This query selects all orders where the maximum item amount is greater than 100.

#### sum

Calculate the total of a numeric element across related entities.

```java
Select.from(ORDERS).columns(
    o -> o.id(),

>     o -> o.items().sum(i -> i.amount()).as("totalAmount")

Author: or
```suggestion
    o -> o.items().sum(i -> i.amount().times(i.price())).as("orderTotal")
```
